Okay. I want to do that last because I realize time is at a premium, so we'll
get into that if we have time. So, let's get started then. So, I'll put on my
formal voice and sound like an interviewer then. Okay. You have all the
background most hard science fiction writers only dream of, yet your books are
written with obvious emphasis on style and characterization. Why is this your
focus and not the science? I tend to believe that you should play all your suits
if you're going to be an earnest writer. You should deal with both style and
content, background, and characterization, and everything. I certainly include a
large dollop of science in my work, I think, and I try to blend this together
with the kind of people who do science. That's my real interest is the impact of
science on people, and the other way around.
I think that mainstream and science fiction are separate categories. Or, well, I
guess they are now, but do you think they shouldn't be melded? Or do you think
they should keep this separate identity? I think that mainstream and any genre
like SF are, in a sense, two ends of a spectrum. One blends into the other.
There are obviously the books that only science fiction addicts will read, which
are incomprehensible to ordinary readers, and that defines the boundary. But
obviously it's a gradual transition from one to the other. Science is, in
science fiction, not the really crucial dividing point. There are many things in
science fiction which set it apart which are not connected with knowing a great
deal of science, but rather with knowing a lot of accepted bits of jargon or
commonplaces we've assumed about the future. The way galactic empires are put
together and so forth, usually very simple-minded in my estimation. And an
ordinary reader coming to these things simply cannot understand them. Therefore,
he rather usually quickly gives up. But therefore I think that it's the
mannerisms of SF that tend to set it apart as much as anything else.
Of course, science fiction is concerned with content a great deal more than
other literature. And therefore that scares off people too. Do you read a great
deal of science fiction or mainstream or have a preference for one or the other?
I read, when I can, the best science fiction and the best in the mainstream. And
also, for example, hard-boiled detective stories and a lot of other things. Now
I keep up on the prominent short story writers in America, for example. So I try
to read eclectically. Excuse me, I'll say it again. Eclectically.
But, of course, everyone, as they get older, has less time to read. Particularly
if they're actually engaged in the real world and have some other job other than
being a writer. Do these other works influence your style continually? Or do you
think you've got that set now? I don't really think that I've got a style. I
certainly have some identifiable mannerisms. But it seems to me that every one
of my books is written somewhat differently. And I do change style and approach
fairly often. I may be wrong about that. Many people may think that there is a
noticeable Benford style. But I don't think that I pick up those things from my
reading directly. Although certainly I'm influenced by a lot of writers. Every
writer is influenced by people who came before. Otherwise, we'd have to
invent literature whole each time we sat down to do a novel. Your novel,
Timescape, just won the Nebula Award. Congratulations, by the way. How did you
come to write that? I took ten years to write Timescape. It's written out of my
experience as a graduate student at the University of California in the 1960s.
Two-thirds of the book occurs in 1962 and 63. And I had always noticed that
science fiction very seldom dealt with the life of a scientist as it is really
lived as I saw it. So when I began to think about writing a book about time, a
subject that had already and always fascinated me and which science fiction had,
it seemed to be, done to death, but I began, in fact, to think about the way
scientists would really try to attempt to transmit information across time. Not
time travel, but simple time telegrams, if you will. And how would it happen?
What would make people do it? How would it be received? What would scientists
think about it? Because, you see, the basic ingredient in the novel is to treat
time communication like a new paradigm in science, so that you have scientists
confronting something that's very unusual that they can't explain, that seems to
not fit the standard way of doing science. After all, here's an experiment
that's being interfered with that seems to be carrying a message. How bizarre.
And so this is like a scientist encountering a brand new scientific idea. So you
get to see in a dramatic fashion how scientists deal with ambiguity and the
unusual nature of their work, which does crop up now and then, after all. That's
what scientific revolutions are about. And at the same time, the reader can
understand what's going on. It's not an arcane matter about genetics or a
nuclear physics that's going on. He knows more than any of the characters all
the way through the book. And that was what made me think of this as a scheme to
show readers things about scientists that just couldn't be told in the normal
way in the world of, say, the double helix and so forth, which is about a
specific experiment in the past. So that was the motivation. And as you can see,
it's sort of a barely science fictional motivation. I really wanted to talk
about both the 60s and 1998, where the message is sent from. But mostly, from
the point of view of us right here and right now, 1981, I deliberately made the
dates of the book fit so that the book was published in hardback in 1980,
exactly halfway between the two times that are the subject of the book.
That and the context of making comments on political matters and of being able
to show a scene from the 1970s that's very different from our 1970s, all those
things made me want to write the book. It's been until the mere decade to
actually write it. You made the novel real to me and to other readers who I've
talked to with the little details, the songs on the radio in the 60s and the
current events, the 35-cent paperback, which was hard to believe, and then how
the people were coping with the future. The thing that really intrigued me was
the mercury hunt in the sewers in England. This technique of putting in the
little realistic scenarios to portray the future and the past is something that
I haven't encountered all that much. How did you develop that? Well, that really
comes out of thinking very hard for a decade about the matter. Every once in a
while it would occur to me, in the case of the 1998 world, to think about what
ordinary activities they would have that would seem strange to us. And as the
years went on, I would think of these things and jot them down, and then I would
try to write a scene about them and to involve a character in them. I think this
method is just living in the world you're writing about for a long time until it
gets to be second nature, and you can select from it things you want to show the
readers. There are whole chapters of Timescape, which I wrote and reflect on
both the present and the past, and finally excluded from the novel feeling that
they weren't really necessary. But there are whole facets of the world I worked
out and then did use. Of course, doing the 1960s was straight, realistic
writing. I simply did a point-for-point, detailed narrative set in a world that
I knew and had lived through and could remember. I was surprised in enormous
detail. I could remember the newspaper headlines, the incidents, who was
fighting who for the heavyweight championship, the whole thing. And of course,
those are just the approaches of the realistic novelist. So that's what I used.
And I think the big help was that I did not think of it as being a science
fiction novel. That may be why it doesn't feel like a science fiction novel. In
a way, I think it is a science fiction novel. A lot of real-life people
inhabited Timescape. Most of them were in the past, but some of them were in the
future. I noticed that Davies and Thorne were in the future. And even Freeman
Dyson had an active part in the book. He did some talking and kind of got the
hero in trouble. Do you know most of these people? And do you need their
permission to put them in a book? Did they get a kick out of it? Well, the
people who actually have walk-on speaking parts, who are identified as real
people, I got the permission from. Freeman Dyson, particularly. People who were
mentioned in passing, I didn't ask their permission, because, after all, they
are people in the world and you can refer to them. No one has a copyright on his
name.
But so far, no one has objected to being mentioned or even talked about in
detail in the book. Dyson certainly didn't mind. And I don't think any of the
disguised characters have said anything about it either. There are some
relatively well-known scientists in the book who are, I would say, rather
mentally concealed, but concealed nonetheless. That, for me, was one of the good
things about the book, is being able to use my experience and all the people
whom I knew and being able to talk about them the way they are, more or less.
Not always complimentary, but that's life, isn't it? I'd say you knew the twins
from Oklahoma quite well, from what I gather. Yes, well, there are some twins
from Oklahoma who are not named in there, who are, in fact, myself and my twin
brother. I had just come from the University of Oklahoma to La Jolla in 1963 and
decided, what the hell, I'll just put myself in the book. In fact, I appear in
the book in several different places. Have you gotten any feedback from people
that normally read mainstream novels about timescape, saying, well, gee, this is
science fiction, it can't be good, but it was, or something like that? Well,
yes, I've gotten a fair number of letters and phone calls and so on from people
who, quote, don't usually read science fiction, unquote, and are surprised to
find that it's science fiction and actually have all the virtues of a regular
novel and still be science fiction. Well, it's good that these people are
catching on to that fact. Admittedly, the field has not given them a large
number of examples to learn from, but I hope we will in future. Of course, the
reason we haven't produced such books before is because it's damned hard. It's a
lot of work. And science fiction is typically not a field which rewards taking a
decade to write a book. That's a sad fact. It's true. Did you ever fear during
this 10 years that this book might not be a commercial success because of the
subject matter and the emphasis on characterization and so forth? Definitely.
But I decided, well, what the hell, I was going to write the book the way I
wanted to, and I didn't care how it would do. In fact, when I finished the
manuscript, I was pretty convinced that I would be able to sell it for only a
minimal advance, and that would be just about it. The overwhelming success, as
far as I'm concerned, of this book, it's now won four awards. She said the
Nebula, the British Award, the Australian, and now the John W. Campbell
International Award. And to have sold so well in hardback, and now it's invented
the second printing and paperback after having been out for less than four
weeks, that kind of reception is to be astounding. Completely unanticipated. I
personally thought it was by far the best piece of writing I'd ever done, but
that doesn't mean I thought it was going to be commercial. In fact, I didn't.
Your earlier books had elements of mysticism and transcendental experiences in
them, which were missing from timescape. Is this a facet of your personality,
this enamor with mysticism? Well, yes, I tend to put material like that in my
books because I think it's there in the sense that there is a mystical content
in science. So many people have commented on it. I have a feeling maybe I'll
have to let it go for a moment. Of course, it's not really true that the
timescape doesn't have elements of mysticism in it. There is the last long
chapter. It can certainly be interpreted in a number of different ways, and
there are some very, very, shall we say, transcendental moments in that last
portion of the book. But certainly the emphasis is much less than in my early
work. You're right about that. Do you think being so well acquainted with
quantum physics puts you in a special position to look at mystical and
transcendental experiences, or would you have it anyway?
Well, that's kind of a chicken and egg question. One of the reasons I became
interested in quantum mechanics is because it seems to me to be a very
fundamental, transcendental way of viewing the world. And therefore I tend to
use material like that in my books and my wish to look at things from that
angle. So, to me, it's just another facet of the world that seems to reward
being looked at from a transcendental point of view. I'm mostly, however, a
rather realistic novelist. I'm not really... I don't think of myself as being a
mystical writer. Maybe others do. Interesting. Think it's true. Larry Nivens
said that any time travel story is per force a fantasy, since the known laws of
physics prohibit it. As a physicist, do you foresee any loopholes that might
allow time travel or time communication or faster than light travel, which this
would all tie together? Well, yes. Of course, the timescape, at its basis, says,
suppose there is this particle called the tachyon, which travels faster than
light. The tachyon has been talked about in scientific literature for about 20
years, and hundreds of papers have been written about it. I've written one
myself. So, if the tachyon exists, it certainly implies faster than light, and
therefore reversed time communication. That's the whole point about timescape.
It's about... It's set in a world in which you say, suppose this is true. As far
as time travel goes, I don't have the slightest clue how to do it. Maybe turn
somebody into tachyon and shoot it backward in time. It's hard to see how you
could do it. That's all. We can't transport someone spatially now just with
waves. Can we? We can't teleport. So, I think, in the sense that Niven meant it,
yes, time travel is a fantasy in the strict sense that science doesn't tell us
how to do it. But, the seduction of time travel stories is the great feeling of
perspective they give you, and being able to contrast past, present, and future
so easily. So, I think that those stories are going to go on for a very long
time. Everyone loves them, and I do, too. They have produced, that area has
produced some of the best SFs ever written. So, I really think it makes sense to
continue the convention in the face of quite well-founded scientific objection.
You rewrote Deeper Than the Darkness as the Stars and Shroud, and I understand
that you, perhaps, may go back and redo some other old works. Why do you choose
to rewrite the old books rather than put all your energy into something new?
Basically, because I didn't want the old works to appear with my name on them
when I could see that they were so deeply flawed, and I thought I could do a
better job. I don't think I'm going to do that with any more of my books, but I
certainly greatly revised a novel of mine. Sort of a homage to the Heinlein
Juvenal called Jupiter Project. I revised that when it went into paperback, and
I did that, as you said, with the Stars and Shroud. Basically, I don't like to
have less than my best in front of the public, and I care more about
craftsmanship than I do about storing up my energies for the next project. I
would prefer to salvage an old work than hammer away at a new one if I could be
contented that at least I had never done anything I thought was really dreadful
and allowed it to go out in public. A lot of writers don't feel this way, and I
understand, particularly economically, why they would believe so, but I don't
have to write for much. Writing is a hobby for me, so I can do it as I like,
thank God. How do you juggle writing of the obvious caliber that you practice it
with the pretty full-time role of being a physics professor? Well, I spend most
of my time doing research and a lot of time teaching of course, and then I have
maybe 10, 15% of my time left over for writing. It's not really left over
because it's my weekends and evenings. How do I do it? Sometimes I wonder. The
best answer is hurriedly. But, in fact, I do work on my prose a great deal. I do
many drafts and everything. I recently acquired a word processor to make this
process simpler. But, fundamentally, long ago, I decided to practice time
conservation wherever possible. The first rule of that is never do anything
twice unless you enjoy it. So, I try to never, say, have to redraft simple
things like memos and always very selective about what I do with times. Other
than that, I just have to say I draw a lot of my material that I write about
from life, from observing people and so on. So, I'm really doing two things at
once. When I go to a scientific conference, I'm sopping up the material, but I'm
also sopping up scientists, watching the way people actually act. Every novelist
does that. It's just that most novelists are full-time writers, and therefore,
they don't get out and see the real world very much. I think that's the great
liability of being a professional writer who only does that is that you run out
of material. And I think the 20th century is full of writers whose big problem
is that they ran out of material.
Let me go back now and ask you the first question on the list since it looks
like we have time. Give us a bit of background how you got into writing science
fiction. Well, I was in graduate school in La Jolla in 1964. I was working very
hard, and I really needed a break. But just going to the beach didn't seem to do
it. So, I began to write short stories. It was a pleasant thing you could do for
an hour in the evening before you fell asleep. And I worked away at that, wrote
some detective stories, which I never sold, then wrote some science fiction
short stories, two or three, I think. No, the third one, I think, yes, was the
one I sold, the first one I sold. And I entered it, and in fact specifically
wrote it for, a short story contest in a magazine of fantasy and science
fiction, and it won second place. And what did I make? Something like a hundred
dollars, and I got a lifetime subscription to the magazine, which has turned out
to be worth quite a bit. So, back there in 1965, I started out my career that
way, and kept writing short stories as I did my doctorate and went off and
became a postdoctoral fellow, and then began to think in terms of writing a
novel. And it took me, I would say, really the better part of a decade to learn
to write novels with anything approaching skill. It's a long haul. I've been
writing now for, what, 16 years, or 17 years, maybe more. And I wrote, in fact,
when I was in high school, I wrote a few short stories and then gave it up. so I
just had writing as a hobby all the way through my life. How did your, when you
first joined the physics departments, how do your colleagues take it before you
have tenure, when you're just green behind the ears, that sort of thing, knowing
that you're a writer? Do they even know it, or dig you about it, or just don't
care what? All of the above. They, some of them, just ignore it. Some of them
think it's outright evidence that you're not really earnestly spending all of
your time and 24 hours a day on your profession, which they more or less expect
you to do. And a number of them think it's a good idea that you should have more
than one suit in your hand.
So it runs through the whole gamut of opinions. There are a lot of academics who
think that writing is okay. And if I were writing little short stories for
literary quarterlies, it would be perfectly okay and just fine. But if I
actually write commercially, that's not so good. And to write commercially and
be successful, that's even worse. And to write science fiction and be
commercially successful is really pretty low. So there are a fair number of
those people. people. But I just ignore them. They cannot be converted or can be
educated. But they best be forgotten. Well, we noticed that you're now a full
professor, so you really don't have to worry about that anymore. Well, that's
true. I've never really worried about it anyway. I really don't give that much
of a damn what people think about my writing in terms of if they evaluate it on
the basis of some kind of perceived status. they wish to assign to. I think
being an approved writer in this society is one of the almost sure signs that
you are a secondary. That is the end of the list and we sure appreciate it. Oh, I'm supposed to ask you one other question.
Have you read James Hogan's Thrice upon a Time? No. Okay, that answers the question. That was
the other time communications book that's come out this year and we have a
raging battle going on in our group about it. So we were going to ask you that.
What's the battle about? Hogan writes, he's kind of an interminable lecturer and
in contrast, this is me, as opposed to writing characterizations and so the
battle is how do you really, how does one write and make it more fun? And I
prefer the characterizations, other people prefer the golly gee science aspect
of it. and he has a lot of that. That's what his is, mainly that approach. He's
invented a whole new realm of physics in order to get the message. He uses a
pretty clever little device where he hops from day to day through a computer
back to the past to tell them to alter it. And it gets altered and then other
things happen. And it's quite enjoyable but it's just an interesting comparison
and contrast to your book. And so we just had to ask it. We wanted to ask it at
the end. Yes, well, I really should read the book. I know exactly the kind of
thing Hogan does. I elected, consciously elected a long time ago, not to do that
because I just don't think for me it's worth doing. It's very clever but it's a
mile wide and a millimeter deep. I'm not saying this specifically about his book
because I haven't read it. It's just that that kind of writing is for me self
-limiting. You will only reach a certain kind of audience with it. And it's not
a bad audience, it's a good audience, but it's very narrow. And also I find it
boring to write that way. It's plain boring. I hate to give lectures. I can give
lectures in person. Why should I give lectures in normal? what can we look for
from you in the near future and the far future? Well, I am finishing this week
at the end of July a novel I've provisionally titled Against Infinity, which is
a very different kind of book for me. And I hope that will be out next year
since. After that, I have the next volume and trilogy I'm writing, a very
loosely connected trilogy. The first volume of it was a novel called In the
Ocean of Night, which I think is the second best book I've written after
Timescape. And the people to that is called Across the Sea of Sons. I have a
book draft of that done and I hope in the next half year or so to finish off a
draft of that and then to get on to the book that goes beyond that. And then
after that, I have a book which is some way similar to Timescape in a general
approach to things, but it's not about time in mind. And I hope to write that,
but I know that that will take a number of years. So that's about all I can plan
on.
Any other questions, guys? Timescape has been pretty positive.
any inquiries about movies on Timescape? Yes, there have been a number.
Hollywood has been in terrible shape this last year. And there was a cost out
done on Timescape which said it would cost more than $20 million, I think $22
million to shoot. And of course, they were not able to get up that amount of
money. but it's still out, I think, CBS is looking at it right now. Who knows?
It would be possible to shoot it.
But the Lord knows about Hollywood just a little as always.
Anything else, guys? Okay, we certainly appreciate it. And as a fan, thanks very
much for slipping in and marring to a book. I didn't ever think it would be
possible. Great. Sure. Anything else you want to slip in? I might secure each of
them. Well, I've talked to these guys. I think I'm a chemist, and I think
chemistry is definitely the worst treated of all the physical sciences in
science fiction. I think people don't do a very good job of that. The physics
and astronomy and the biology, great. The soft science is great. Chemistry kind
of gets screwed, I think. I think so. There are not many chemistry disorders.
That's right. But actually, it is kind of a boring subject to most people. I
wouldn't say, I mean, Hal Clement is mostly a chemistry writer. Yeah, this is
true with the atmospheres and so forth. Sure. The nitrogen effects, yeah. Sure,
okay. How could I forget?
Okay, we appreciate your taking the time to talk to us. And again, we'll get
back to you and perhaps do another one of these days when your other books come
out. We look forward to them. Fine, I appreciate the opportunity. It's really
nice to be able to speak specifically to an SF audience. It seldom gets the
chance. Okay, thanks again, we'll talk to you later then. Thank you. You bet. Bye-bye
then. Bye-bye.